Lending Club is a peer-to-peer lending company based in the United States, and is the world's largest peer-to-peer lending platform. Borrowers can create personal loans between $1,000-40,000, with loan periods of either 36 or 60 months. Investors may then search the loan listings on the Lending Club website and invest in loans. Investors have access to information supplied by Lending Club about the borrower and loan, and earn money from loan interest. Therefore, the ability to predict whether a given loan will be charged off is important for investors to be sure of recouping their investment. In addition, it is possible that loans are currently denied which could prove viable for investment purposes, and funding these loans would be beneficial both to investors and to Lending Club.

Lending Club provides data on both funded and rejected loans from 2007-2018. Funded loans include information about the loan (amount, interest rate, loan length, purpose, current status, etc.) and about the borrower (debt-to-income ratio, FICO score, employment length, etc.). The information provided in the funded loan data is not all available to investors, so for the purpose of this project, I will restrict predictors to those available to investors. Rejected loans contain less information, but include information about the loan (amount, purpose) and the borrower (debt-to-income ratio, FICO score, employment length, zip code, and state). Not all fields have standardized entries, and fields may have missing data.

This project has four stages: (1) Pre-processing the data to remove fields with >25% missing data and fields and to standardize entries into a form useable for modeling; (2) Determining which variables differ between fully paid and charged off loans; (3) Building and testing models for predicting charge-off, including a full model and a model only including variables also present in the rejected loans dataset; (4) Predicting if any rejected loans had a likelihood of being fully paid greater than or equal to the average rate of funded loans.

(1) In the funded data, 58 fields are missing >25% of entries. These include primarily fields that do not apply to all loans, such as fields relating to hardship, settlement, or secondary applicants. The remaining fields contain >=85% of entries. Of the remaining fields, 31 are available for investors to view. Of these variables, several are redundant or do not provide useful information, such as the fields for unique ID (no useable information) and loan grade (redundant with loan sub-grade). Paring down fields in this way, a remaining 23 fields are available for modeling from the funded loans dataset. Of these, 6 are also present in the rejected loan dataset.

(2) I conducted t-tests for continuous variables and chi-squared tests for categorical variables to determine which variables were significantly different between fully paid and charged off loans, at a significance level of p < 0.001. All 16 continuous variables were significant, and 6 of the 7 categorical variables (excluding initial listing status) were significant.

For visualization purposes, I have plotted two of the continuous variables with the logistic regression. Due to the quantity of data, I have not included a confidence interval; when conducted with 100 boostraps, the confidence interval is not visible when plotted at this scale.

The first figure shows the likelihood of a given loan being charged off, given the interest rate of the loan. In this figure, charged off loans are represented with "1", while fully paid loans are represented with "0". Interest rates range from approximately 5% to 33%; loans with higher interest rates are significantly more likely to be charged off than loans with lower interest rates. The interest rate is a feature visible to investors, but not one assigned to rejected loans, so this variable will be used in the full model but not the model for rejected loans.

The second figure shows a potential issue with collinearity. In this figure, FICO scores are shown along the x-axis, while interest rate is plotted along the y-axis. Higher FICO scores are much more likely than lower FICO scores to have low interest rates. Both variables are available to investors determining whether to fund an account, but as FICO scores play a part in determining interest rate, it may be necessary to only include one of these variables in the models.

(3) To produce training and test data, the data will randomly be subdivided into 80% training data and 20% test data. As not all variables in the dataset are continuous, I will use generalized linear models to model whether loans will be fully paid or charged off, using variables with significant differences between fully paid and charged off loans. Given that the response variable is binary, I will use logistic regression to model the data. I will test for multicolinearity and remove variables from the model that are colinear to prevent overfitting of the model. 

Two models will be built to predict the test data. The first model will contain all non-colinear variables; this model would serve investors in predicting whether to fund a given loan that has been accepted by Lending Club. The second model will contain only the 6 variables that are also present in the rejected loan dataset. This second model would serve the Lending Club to determine what currently rejected loans are likely to be successfully paid. I will compare the efficacy of these two models to see how well the second model performs in comparison to the full model.

(4) I will apply the model containing only variables present in the rejected loan dataset to the rejected loans, to determine if any currently rejected loans would be predicted to perform as well or better than an average loan in the accepted loan dataset.